GRAIL (written in Java) to generate T-SQL
==================================================
This directory contains code (written in Java) to generate a T-SQL program that
can be run against Microsoft's SQL Server. Here are the steps:

1. Clone the git Grail repository into your local machine using one of the
   following commands:
  * `git clone https://github.com/UWQuickstep/Grail`

2. Change your current working directory to `Grail/java`.
  * `cd Grail/java`

3. Change directory to "src" to browse through the code or to compile and run 
   the code.
  * `cd src`

4. Compile the java code using the following command. Note you will need to
   [install Java](https://java.com/en/download/help/index_installing.xml "Java Install Page")
   on your machine.
  * `javac *.java`

5. Run the Grail code, in any of the following ways: (`./config.grail` is used as
   the default configuration file, if no config file is specified)
  * `java Grail` (uses the default configuration file `./config.grail`)
  * `java Grail ../../analytics/pagerank.grail` 
     (to generate the T-SQL script to compute PageRank)
  * `java Grail ../../analytics/sssp.grail` 
     (to generate the T-SQL script to compute the single source shortest path)
  * `java Grail ../../analytics/wcc.grail` 
    (to generate the T-SQL script for weakly connected components)

6. Create the `vertex` and the `edge` table for the algorithm that you would like to run.
   The sql queries that you can use to generate some sample data can be found in the top
   level directory datagen. For example, if you would like to run weakly connected components,
   just open the sql files create\_and\_load\_vertex.sql and create\_and\_load\_edge.sql in your
   Microsoft SQL Server and execute them. A sample vertex and edge table will be created.

7. Execute the SQL statements generated by Grail (i.e. output of step 5)
   in a Microsoft SQL Server. Note before you do that, you should have the
   graph data loaded into two basic tables: `vertex` and `edge` as explained
   in step 6 . See the [top-level README.md file](../../README.md).
